The nature of disease today is quite different than even a century ago. Historically, most major medical issues—such as polio, tuberculosis, and pneumonia—were the result of infectious diseases. These are problems caused by particular microbes—bacteria, viruses, or fungi—that humans could pick up from their environment and then spread. Naturally, the solution to such diseases would be to eliminate the offending microbes, and indeed this is what was done. A major victory in the fight against these diseases was the discovery of penicillin, the first antibiotic. In 1928, Alexander Fleming, a medical researcher, discovered accidentally that a particular species of mold had grown in one of his experiments, and it turned out that this mold produced certain metabolites that were able to kill the bacteria surrounding it. Fleming isolated these bactericidal compounds, which he called penicillin after the name of the mold—with this, medicine had been completely changed. 

Slowly in the past few years, medicine has begun to enter what one might call a post antibiotic era. While theoretical issues of antibiotic resistance have been on the minds of researchers for decades, such issues are only very recently becoming a widespread, practical problem, most notably with rise of certain strains of the bacterium Staphylococcus Aureus that are resistant to numerous families of potent antibiotics. While in the past the solution to this type of issue was to concoct more potent forms of antibiotics, research is now finding that this may not be the best solution. At the crux of this newfound hesitation is the discovery of the importance of the human microbiome—the system of bacteria (and, to a slightly lesser extent, fungi, viruses, and archaea) that live on and inside all humans. Previously thought to be irrelevant to human health, these microbes have now been found to be key to the proper functioning of numerous bodily processes. 

Research on the human microbiome, though becoming more sophisticated everyday, is still quite preliminary. Scientists today have some understanding of the diversity of a healthy microbiome and have been able to identify the particular microbes that are most commonly found in humans (as well as any abnormalities for particular individuals and variations between distinct populations). However, they do not understand the precise role of each of these microbes, and it is postulated that they form a complex, interdependent ecosystem. Like any other organisms in an ecosystem, the microbes living on and inside humans compete for survival, existing in an intricate balance that is dependent on the actions of the human host. 

While certain novel therapies are being developed for microbiome manipulation—the Fecal Matter Transplant, a method of transplanting the gut microbiome from a healthy donor to an unhealthy patient through the donor’s fecal matter comes to mind—such therapies are very new, not-widely-tested, and, in the United Sates, limited in approved scope to rather severe diseases. Manipulation of diet thus remains the most practical way of effecting change in the microbiome: certain foods feed certain microbes, so changes in diet affect the distribution of microbes represented. 

This is important because the medical issues that plague society today are largely chronic in nature and are influenced by the state of one’s microbiome. Examples of such issues are autoimmune diseases like Lupus and Rheumatoid Arthritis as well as obesity, diabetes, and the metabolic syndrome. Unlike infectious diseases, these issues cannot be addressed with antimicrobial protocols as they are not caused by a particular offending organism. Rather, they are driven—created and exacerbated—by factors of diet and lifestyle; they arise slowly and are difficult to eradicate. 

Both food habits and lifestyle habits affect human health in two ways: directly and indirectly. There are the direct metabolic effects that have been long acknowledged and are more easily visible: eating too many calories without sufficient exercise, for example, contributes to weight gain, which contributes to the development of diseases like diabetes. However, the indirect effects—physiological effects resulting from a largely invisible change in the internal microbiome—are more insidious and, resultantly, are perhaps more dangerous. Poor dietary habits (and lifestyle habits, interestingly) contribute to a distribution of microbes that produce metabolites that cause the host to further desire such habits. [CITE] This is one—though far from the only—reason changing such habits is difficult, and care should be taken to avoid encouraging the development of poor habits in the first place. With regard to diet in America, the responsibility is then on systems of American food production to make appropriate foods readily available. 

To address lifestyle briefly, data for roughly the past two decades indicates that the physical activity levels of Americans is slowly and steadily increasing; however, rates of obesity and chronic diseases are increasing as well, which is counterintuitive. [CITE] The most logical place, then, to search for why this may be the case is in American food habits. Now, while both diet and lifestyle each have a large impact on the progression of most chronic diseases (whether the relative impact of each is equal or not is still to be determined), fully considering both and their intricacies would be a project of overly large scope with long-term data that is tenuous. For this reason, this project focuses on the effect of food trends and the American food supply on American health, for which there is data that is more robust and stretches a longer timespan. 

While, as mentioned, a great number of diseases are influenced by diet—often through effects on the microbiome, for example—the connection between diet and disease is more clearly evident with certain diseases. One such disease is diabetes, for which there has been a long-acknowledged connection to diet. This acknowledgment, in part, is due to the inherent metabolic nature of diabetes and the resultant directly visible connection to food. For this reason, diabetes is an ideal disease to study in examining the relation between health and food supply. Furthermore, incidence rates of diabetes in America have been tracked by the CDC for over a century, yielding a robust and reliable source of data. 



Both historically and today, Americans on the whole seem to have a predilection for fad dieting. Such dieting practices often vilify a particular macronutrient and praise another or praise a particular way of eating. They are often a result of new research in medical and nutrition science, but the research is often taken out of scientific context and coopted by the public. Resulting diets are often highly absolutist, making strong claims based on research that may be imperfect. Unlike with fully controlled scientific studies, nutrition science involves working with human metabolism, which is a complex system that is not well understood in itself. Nutrition research cannot therefore make absolute claims because all relevant variables may not be considered or fully understood. 

Still, diets based on such research persist, and it is therefore important to see how publication of such research and popularity of such diets affects American food availability and consumption. 